The Project Gutenberg eBook of A military interlude
    
This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: A military interlude

Author: Ernest Haycox


        
Release date: April 16, 2026 [eBook #78459]

Language: English

Original publication: New York: The Butterick Publishing Company, 1927

Other information and formats: www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/78459

Credits: Prepared by volunteers at BookCove (bookcove.net)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A MILITARY INTERLUDE ***

                          A MILITARY INTERLUDE

                            By Ernest Haycox


The hut was both cold and dark. There were no windows to admit the
light of the waning day, but through every crack and chink penetrated
the sharp, bitter air of January. Alva Jukes, standing in the doorway,
saw only white ovals of faces staring upward from the wretched pallets
and, though he was a brash, hard-tempered man, oft called upon to
witness suffering, the sight of so much unnecessary misery fed the
latent rebellion in his Scotch-Irish heart. He struck a posture, put a
hand to a hip as if caressing a sword-hilt and mimicked the voice of a
colonel well known but not well loved by the brigade--

“And what have you got for supper, my brave fellows?”

The answer came back to him in mock respect from half a dozen throats--

“Fire-cake and water, sir!”

“Ah,” purred Jukes, plucking at an imaginary cloak, “and what have you
for breakfast, sons of freedom?”

“Fire-cake and water, sir!”

“And now, my laddies, tell me what you eat for dinner.”

“Fire-cake and water, sir!”

Jukes, grinning dourly through his whiskers, joined them in the chorus--

“God send our commissary of purchases to live on fire-cake and water.”

Snow blanketed Valley Forge, dampened the lesser camp sounds and made
the crackling-cold air seem doubly severe. A cart, loaded with wood,
crept past the hut, drawn by ten or twelve men hitched to a rope; men
who moved with dreadful slowness, heads bent, feet slipping on the
ground. Here and there fires burned on the brigade street, surrounded
by the feeble and the ragged. An officer rode by--a queer sight with a
counterpane covering him from head to foot and a shawl, wrapped turban
fashion around his head. Alva Jukes stared at these scenes with somber
eyes, his hatchet-faced visage growing more and more pointed.

“What’s become o’ the fire I left burnin’?” he asked. “---- of a crew
you are to let it die!”

“There ain’t no more wood, Serg’nt,” croaked a remote voice. “I give
it the last lick an’ a promise, but it didn’t seem to help. Here’s a
letter fer you--come by the courier a small time back.”

“Hey, a letter?” muttered Jukes. “An’ who’d be writin’ to me?”

He crossed the threshold and met a man’s outstretched hand. Retreating
to the open, he broke the seal and spread the paper before puzzled eyes.
It took some time for him to decipher the illiterate, poorly formed
scrawl, for he had no more education than the common run; but at last he
mastered the sentences, face settling.

    D’r son, you been gone 2 years now, ain’t it time to come
    hame I ben worrit for y’r helth, the Neely boys went to
    war for 3 months an come hame braggin fit to kill. Y’ve
    did your share, pa is doin porely, seems he cant get his
    wind back after the cold. I never eat but think you must
    be starvin. Come hame, y’r lovein mother.

He folded the message and tucked it in his pocket. Some one coughed
spasmodically, ending with a strangled sigh.

“I don’t figger there’d be room left in the hospital er I’d go. Serg’nt,
you better look at Will Cordes; he ain’t answerin’ no questions lately.”

Jukes stepped around a body and knelt in a corner.

“Will, me lad, ’tis a poor time to be sleepin’.” There was no answer and
Jukes’ hand, crossing the man’s face, found it stone cold. “Will,” said
he, sharply, “you’ll be freezin’ unless you move about. Come now.”

He spoke to unheeding ears. His fingers, resting over the flat chest,
found no reassuring movement. He rested on his knees for a long period,
while a dismal silence pervaded the hut.

“I reckon,” said a husky voice, “he’s done passed out, eh, Serg’nt?”

Jukes rose.

“I’ll be gettin’ a buryin’ detail. ’Tis the third from this hut in a
month. Well, he was a strong lad or he’d gone earlier.”

Another voice broke in:

“Jukes, you heard anything ’bout them clothes supposed to be comin’?
Fella told me a ship was in from France with enough to supply the hull
army.”

“Huh,” said Jukes, retreating to the doorway. “All I heard was the
Congress had sent a committee down here to see why we ain’t satisfied.”

“---- the Congress! What’ve they ever done fer us? Yah, sendin’ a
committee! All they do is send committees! Washington could’ve won
this war by now if Congress was anything but a pack o’ shilly-shally
lawyers! Look at poor Will--the boy’d never died if the cursed
Congress had only kep’ us in clo’s an’ vittals. ---- the Congress
fer a pack o’ spineless, jealous rats! They talk fine but they ain’t
got spunk enough to take keer of the army. Better keep their noses
outen this camp or they’ll have no army.”

It was a white-hot indictment, spoken in half hysterical tones. All the
man’s fears, all his outraged emotions, unleashed by the death of a
comrade, went into the diatribe. At the end he was left with his breath
coming in gasps while the others of the hut muttered their approval. He
had spoken the almost unanimous opinion of the army, an army who daily
saw the carts wheeling a dozen bodies like that of the unfortunate Will
Cordes through the streets. Jukes, though possessed of tempestuous
emotions and a stern sense of justice, bridled his feelings with a
sardonic pressure of lips and retreated from the hut.

Turning up the street, he trudged toward the hospital tent, a long, thin
figure with the face and eyes of a malcontent. Nature in forming him had
done him injustice; for he was not as bad nor as ill-disciplined as the
sullenness of mouth and cheek would indicate. The expression was an
inheritance from Covenanting ancestors, people who had never found life
an easy affair. Nevertheless, men gave him the compliment of legends.
His taciturnity in camp and his profane frenzy in battle made him a
known figure throughout the brigade.

He reached the hospital hut, left a report of the dead man and retraced
his way through the snow, observing here and there footprints edged
with crimson. It made him all the more bitter-eyed and his sharp nose
sank nearer his chest. He passed several fires and came again to his
own cheerless hut. He tarried only long enough to take an ax leaning by
the door and went on, aiming for a stand of timber beyond the brigade
street.

A certain shapely tree drew him through a deep snowdrift. Getting a
position knee deep in the snow, he sank the bitt of the ax into the
bark and sent the chips flying.

“Guess paw must be doin’ poorly,” he muttered, between blows. “Else
why should maw be spendin’ money on a letter? That cussed Bige done
said he’d provide fer ’em while I was gone.”

But then Bige was only a shiftless cousin, too afraid of his own skin to
join the army, and perhaps two years’ providing for the family had set
him to grumbling. Born grumblers, all the Jukes. He balanced the ax and
measured the fall of the tree; he too, he decided, was a grumbler.

His labor was arrested by a sudden disturbance in the street. A
lieutenant strode along the line of huts shouting:

“Turn out, men! Turn out for grand parade! Turn out, Pennsylvania!”

Jukes stared at the graying sky and left the bitt of the ax buried in
the tree, determining to finish the chore when he had returned from
parade. Floundering through the drift, he reached the street, only to
be assailed by an entirely new and unexpected commotion. The men were
turning out, no doubt, of that; but they were coming not with muskets
and belts, nor in the usual lethargic manner. They emerged from the
huts bearing pots and pans, beating them together, sending a racket
toward the leaden sky and breaking into a chant that, started by one
voice, was immediately taken up by others until the camp rang with
it.

“No meat, no soldier! No bread, no parade! Poor Dick a-freezin’! No
meat, no soldier!”

The officer raised his arms futilely while the ragged soldiers made a
ring around him. At every instant fresh voices joined the chorus and
more pans swelled the tumult. Jukes, elbowing his way to the fore of
the circle, saw angry faces, sick faces, faces that were flushed and
faces that were ghastly white.

The whole affair had an undertone of desperation; they were not men
revolting from discipline; they were men who had very nearly reached
the limit of endurance. Ill, discouraged, and brooding over the
obvious injustices done to them, one man’s catch-phrase had set them
off. Jukes’ temper flamed in sympathy. He reached the center of the
throng in time to hear the lieutenant, an angry and puzzled man,
sing out:

“Stop it, men! D’you want to turn this camp upside down? ---- of an
example we’ll make for other regiments. Stop the infernal racket!”

He was too young to command influence and his words were drowned by the
redoubled cry:

“No meat, no soldier! No more fire-cake an’ water!”

One side of the ring parted precipitately and four horsemen, led by a
plump brigadier with ruddy cheeks, forced a path to the center. The
brigadier leaned over to catch the lieutenant’s words. And then as
suddenly as all this racket had begun it subsided, leaving the crowd
moving uneasily, some exhausted, others implacably rooted to their
places. The brigadier’s face was very solemn, and when he spoke it
was not in anger but with compassionate gravity.

“You do yourselves ill, gentlemen,” said he, “to create such a
disturbance. Must we win battles from the enemy and lose them among
ourselves? Fie that there should be such dissension! Come now, what’s
the root of all this?”

The silence was so heavy that the crackling of wood on a near-by fire
echoed like gunshots in the frosty air. A voice sang out--

“Jemmy Rice, you speak for us.”

Jukes waited several moments to hear the man’s voice. At last he turned
and sought through the crowd until his eyes fell upon Rice--a tumultuous
character of his own company who had the readiest tongue for grievances
in all the camp. But Jemmy Rice was silent now in face of the brigadier.
For this was akin to mutiny and he had no stomach to put himself up as a
ringleader to be shot.

Jukes, waiting further, closed his fist and took a pace forward where
the brigadier’s searching eyes might find him. The wild rush of feeling
that sprang upward, had it been allowed to escape, would have sent a
torrent of angry words upon the officer. Jukes checked it, lips turning
thin from the effort. His somber face met the brigadier not defiantly
but as an equal speaking to an equal.

“A man died in my hut this afternoon fer lack o’ food an’ lack o’
blankets. Died on the ground with nary a straw beneath him. There’s
four others in that hut an’ none fit to be abroad. _That’s_ what we
raise Cain about.”

The brigadier inclined his head.

“I am aware of the misfortunes of this camp. Every officer worth a
grain of salt is aware of them. Don’t you think we spend our days
trying to make conditions a little better? But what help d’you expect
by this conduct?”

Jukes, looking beyond the brigadier, caught sight of his captain, an
angry man indeed that one of his own company should be spokesman of
rebellion. He squared his shoulders and proceeded:

“We ain’t doubtin’ your efforts. But it don’t seem in the power o’
officers to help us, so we try raisin’ our own voices. We ain’t had meat
fer six days. Last rations o’ bread were plumb moldy. Clothes--well, we
don’t expect none, never havin’ had an issue since October. There’s half
o’ this company in the hospital an’ more waitin’ to get in when beds are
empty. As fer pay, I ain’t seen a scrap o’ money fer fourteen months.
Now we hear there’s a committee of the Congress comin’ down to see why
we ain’t satisfied. Well, sir, God grant they come to this company fer
information!”

The swelling echo behind him told Jukes he had spoken the brigade’s
mind. The captain’s face was black as thunder but the brigadier never
changed a whit.

“You are mild enough. Were I inclined I could add to that tale of
misfortune and make it darker still. Gentlemen, your grievances are
my own. But it will never do to break down like this. It only gives
our enemies a chance to strengthen their position. Nothing will ever
convince me you are the kind to sully your honor by sedition. I want
you all to disperse to your huts. Meanwhile I may tell you there is
at this moment wagon-trains bound for camp with warm clothes and
fresh beef. Now, gentlemen, retire to your quarters.”

The brigadier, looking over their thoughtful countenances, knew he had
broken the back of resistance. They had given his words attention and
that meant they were still reasonable. Being a kindly man, he clinched
his victory with mildness.

“Many of you are very weak. Considering that, we will omit grand parade
tonight. The guards will be posted informally.”

The men broke from the ring one by one, slowly returning to their huts.
The brigadier and his staff rode away. Jukes, profoundly affected,
trudged down the street, breasted the snow bank and caught the handle of
his ax. A dozen blows brought the tree down and he set to cutting off
branches and sections. Perhaps a half-hour passed at this occupation and
the gray dusk fell without warning while he meditated over the plight of
his comrades. His recent speech had made him aware of his own personal
troubles, too, and as he chopped at the log he thought again of his
folks at home.

“That Bige,” he muttered, “allus was a no-’count. As fer them braggin’
Neely boys, they never was worth powder to blow ’em up. Paw must be
doin’ poorly.”

He drove the ax into the log and loaded his arms with split wood.
Stumbling back to the hut, he began shaving a stick of kindling. He
built a teepee of the splinters and went to the adjoining fire for a
burning brand to start his own blaze. A flame shot upward and caught
the sticks. Some one in the hut called to him:

“That you, Jukes? Didn’t you see the notice?”

Jukes piled more wood on the fire.

“What notice?”

“Fella come down from captain’s quarters with a notice an’ posted it to
our hut while you was gone. Better see what it says.”

Jukes took up a flaming branch and carried it to the hut wall. There,
stuck to a log where the company orders were usually put, he found the
following announcement, written in the clerk’s bold hand:

    From this day Jem Rice will be sergeant of the company,
    taking place of Alva Jukes, returned to the ranks.

                                         --Fleming, Captain.

He stood there for a long time, reading the notice thrice over, making
sure of its import. The captain’s dark, angry glance had borne fruit
and he, Alva Jukes, was to lose the tabard of authority he had won by
his own reckless effort. To lose it for speaking nothing but truth;
and, what was more unfair, to lose it to a man who had not the courage
of his beliefs.

The wild, Scotch-Irish rage gave power to his hand. The burning stick
smashed against the notice and sputtered, lighting and consuming the
paper.

“Let ’em fight their own war, then!” he cried, ducking into the hut.
“I’ve done my share!” He went to his corner of the gloomy place,
rolled together his bundle of belongings and took his rifle. Going
out, he stopped to add fresh fuel to the fire. “Better come an’ take
care o’ this now,” he called back.

Ploughing through the snow, he was swallowed by the night. But he hadn’t
gone twenty yards before he stopped, put down his rifle and bundle and
went back to the fallen tree. He collected another armful of wood and
packed it to the fire, grumbling--

“Ain’t a blessed one o’ them boys able to lift a stick.”

A moment later he had vanished again, turning his course to pass the
pickets, bound homeward, a deserter from Valley Forge.

The farther he traveled the more powerfully did the bitter resentment
affect him. At last he cried out to the black winter sky.

“May the Lord strike me dead if ever I see the army again. ---- the
Congress! Let ’em fight fer their own freedom if they’re so sot on it.
A pack o’ shilly-shally lawyers an’ argufyers!”

                   *       *       *       *       *

He was a tough, canny fellow, Alva Jukes, and capable of sustaining
himself through hard affairs. That night, a great deal later, he turned
off the road and slept in a barn. At the first crack of day he was away,
bearing in his pouch two ears of dried corn, which was his only food for
the next ten hours. His course led him northwesterly along a pike,
aiming straight for the backwoods part of the State, toward that land he
had left better than two years before.

As he traveled he kept good watch behind for patrols that swept the
environs of Valley Forge. He was not of a mind to be taken and marched
back before a summary court. And so it was that, when his eyes spied
horsemen coming along the road, he dropped into a stand of trees and
let them pass. They were a few officers on a reconnoitering party and
after they vanished around a bend he came from concealment.

At the joining of highways some distance farther along, he chose the
lesser used route and soon was slogging through drifts of snow. The sky
was lowering and beyond noon the flakes began to drift slantwise through
the air. It was about this time, too, that he considered himself removed
sufficiently from the army to abandon his precaution and to give all his
attention to the road ahead.

The fact that he had left camp without leave bothered his conscience
not at all. He was only doing what hundreds of others had done before
him. Indeed, members of that army regarded their enlistment agreements
as flexible contracts.

Active campaigning kept them together, but when winter set in and the
chance of battle was remote they sat before their fires and listened to
the call of the home people who needed their help. Then the brigades
dwindled. Jukes, bending against the drifts, defended his course with
arguments that seemed to him perfectly valid.

“Two years ’thout a single leave,” said he. “Ain’t that enough fer one
man? Let some o’ these proud fire-eaters at home try their luck. I done
my share.”

He was shrewd enough to know that there were many thousands of
able-bodied citizens who had never answered the call to colors and
who were perfectly content to let others do their share of fighting.
To men of Jukes’ nature, endowed with a keen sense of justice, this
was only an added argument as to the propriety of his act. He had
done far more than his share. Now let some other take his place.

Even so, his thoughts turned now and then, as the afternoon advanced
and he found himself in strange country, to that dark and miserable
hut where his comrades rested, all but helpless.

“I reckon there’ll be grand parade tonight,” he mused. “Well, there
won’t be many turnin’ out fer it. No they won’t. An’ I bet they let
the fire die again. As fer poor Will Cordes--the cussed Congress c’n
take the blame fer that.”

The graying shadows came again, flecked by softly falling snow. Here
and there, at wide intervals on the road, he passed farmhouses with
lights gleaming through the windows and sparks showering from chimneys.
He might have turned in and asked shelter, but a stubborn pride kept
him away. He was not a straggler, nor could he stomach the thought of
begging at doors. He trudged on, waiting for dark to come that he might
crawl into a barn overnight.

His keen ears caught the sound of hoofs and he turned to find a
solitary figure riding out of a side road and turning his way. Jukes
resumed his march, stolidly indifferent. Nor did he cast another
glance behind, although he heard the traveler coming nearer; instead,
he took the side of the highway, prepared to let the other pass. The
traveler came abreast and reined in, speaking courteously.

“A bad day to be afoot, sir.”

Jukes shifted his gun to the other shoulder and looked up to see a
plump, benign face. The man was of a quality, a country squire, well
dressed and bearing with him a pride of place. A pair of blue eyes
beamed from beneath bushy brows, singularly penetrating eyes. Jukes
felt the full weight of their scrutiny and was roused to sudden
watchfulness.

“I’ve marched in worse times,” said he, noncommittally, still holding
aside to let the man pass.

But the elderly gentleman was of a social nature.

“Doubtless you come from Valley Forge,” he suggested. “Going home,
possibly, on leave.”

“Take it that way,” assented Jukes, not entirely pleased at the
deception but considering it the better policy.

The elderly gentleman looked at the forbidding sky.

“It will snow heavily all night. You had better take shelter soon.
There’s a tavern a mile down the road. You’ll find it agreeable.”

“Tavern,” grunted Jukes. “Where’d you figger I’d get money to spend in a
tavern? I ain’t been paid in fourteen months.”

“But you most assuredly can’t sleep in the open,” protested the squire.
“It’s devilish cold these nights.”

Jukes looked at the man’s fine clothes with sudden resentment.

“I’ve slept in worse. An’ there’s plenty o’ barns along the way.”

“Nonsense. Let it not be said of Pennsylvania that she neglected her
soldiers. We’ll stop at the tavern and I shall have the fellow take
care of you overnight. Consider yourself as my guest.”

“And who,” demanded Jukes, “might you be?”

“I, sir, am St. Louis Cotton, of Cotton Hall and member of the
Pennsylvania Assembly.”

“A lawyer of the Congress?” demanded Jukes, flinging up his head.

“Not of the Continental Congress. I have not that honor. But of the
Pennsylvania Assembly.”

The distinction was not fine enough to check Jukes’ animosity. Here was
one of the gentry who debated and dallied and broke their promises and
appointed futile committees while the army starved.

“---- your hospitality!” he cried. “I take nothin’ from shilly-shally
lawyers. ’Tis your kind that makes misery fer the army. ’Tis you who
eat well an’ sleep warm while the rest o’ us go without!”

St. Louis Cotton, esquire, sat bolt upright in the saddle and blew
through his nose.

“That is cursed impertinence, sir. I offer you the gratitude of a State
and you answer it like a wagon-master. I see you are another of those
infested with disrespect for the people’s legislatures. There is some
sinister influence at work amongst you.”

“Influence o’ an empty belly,” retorted Jukes. “An’ what do you fine
gentlemen accomplish, I’d like to know? When we ask fer vittals an’
food we get smart promises. We starve an’ you tell us we eat too
much meat anyway. You’re a pack o’ scoundrels an’ the country’d be
better without you! ’Tis no credit due you General Washington wins
his battles!”

The squire held his peace and Jukes, looking upward through the fast
thickening dusk, could make out the ruddy face screwed to the point
of apoplexy.

“Fire away, old man,” he added contemptuously. “Give us some o’ them
pretty words you use so nice on committees.”

The squire spoke with a commendable restraint--

“I suppose members of the army could do better, were they elected to
serve in the Congress?”

“There’d be no shilly-shally, I tell you.”

“When you grow older,” said the gentleman, “you will know better. If
a body of angels came together they would fall to quarreling in these
terrible times. It is not human nature to be forever agreeable, no
matter how desperate the cause. You soldiers forget, too, that every
State has its word in the councils of Congress, and seldom do all
States agree. Each has its own interests to watch. Perhaps the
Congress makes unfulfilled promises, perhaps it errs in judgment. It
is a body without power, my friend. It can ask flour and beef of the
States, but only conscience can make those States supply the need. Do
you forget that?”

Jukes grunted, disquieted. The old gentleman handled words as he handled
a gun. He could not oppose the argument because he had no knowledge. But
of what use reason when the misery and misfortune of Valley Forge was
there to confound all the fine talk of lawyers. If they wanted a free
country why didn’t they find means of helping their soldiers?

“’Tis strange,” said he, “how you gentlemen draw pay an’ wear fine
clothes no matter how you disagree. An’ it’s a cussed example you set
the country by runnin’ off from Philadelphia every time a British gun
sounds within fifty miles. A fine example!”

“I can plainly see,” snorted the old gentleman, “that you are a
malcontent. You say you are on leave? Where is your paper to show it?”

“I’ll show no papers,” said Jukes, stoutly.

“Then you are a deserter. ----, sir, I’ve a notion to clap a pistol at
your head and turn you around for the provost guards.”

Jukes slipped the musket from his shoulders.

“Mind your business, old fellow, or I’ll knock you off that perch.”

They came to a halt, facing each other as the dusk gave way to darkness
and the snow fell about them in redoubled thickness. Jukes laughed
grimly.

“Stick to your debatin’, old man. You c’n do better at it. Leave the
guns to a fightin’ man. Le’s go, now. I ain’t got time to waste on a
fat old turkey-cock like you.”

St. Louis Cotton swore softly, putting his horse in motion.

“You _are_ a renegade--a desperate ruffian, better out of the army than
in it.”

“Good enough to kill Englishmen though, ain’t I? Good enough to believe
in your fine promises when everything looked mighty black. Now you an’
your blue-blood friends c’n fight fer your own necks. I’m through!”

They turned a curve of the road and had sight of a tavern hidden amongst
trees, not a hundred yards away. Jukes bit his words in two and came to
a halt. A door of the tavern stood wide open, with the yellow light
making a lane in the snow. And up that lane filed a squad of men dressed
in the uniform of British dragoons. The door closed behind them, leaving
Jukes with dry lips and a question on his tongue.

“There a camp o’ those animals hereabouts, old feller?”

“My eyes, they’re ---- poor,” said the squire. “What did you see?”

“British dragoons,” muttered Jukes, peering through the darkness. “Saw
six go inside. Wonder--”

The squire was swearing.

“That patrol again! Sweeps this part of the country frequently. No camp
this side of Philadelphia. ----, I’d like to put a stop to it! If I had
another man or two.”

“Hold on, old feller,” interrupted Jukes, surprized at the former’s
warlike speech. “You ain’t the one to do any fightin’. If they’d ketch
you usin’ a gun an’ wearin’ civilian clothes they’d hang you.”

“Tut,” said the squire. “I bear a colonel’s commission in the militia.”

“Milisher, huh? Well, anybody could be an officer in the milisher. It’s
no-count.”

Jukes was on his knee, head thrust forward, as if trying to penetrate
the darkness. The squire dismounted from his horse, muttering.

“If you weren’t such a rascally fellow and we had another one or two--”

“Old man,” broke in Jukes, “I’m goin’ to do a little scoutin’. Stand
fast till I come back.”

He slipped his knapsack to the ground and swiftly advanced, the
aggressive Scotch-Irish spirit rousing at the proximity of the enemy
and a daring plan working through his canny head. Within ten yards
of the place he stopped, hearing the champing of a bit. After some
moments of intent observation he decided no guard had been left with
the animals and moved around the corner of the tavern to a window.
The light sparkled through the frosted panes. Jukes removed his hat,
raised himself cautiously and commanded a clear view of the
interior.

His count had been right. Six of them, headed by a sergeant, were
seated around a table; six solid looking fellows with vests loosened to
the heat of the room, saber points clanking on the floor. The tavern
keeper moved across the boards with steaming cups and disappeared in
the kitchen a moment, reappearing with a platter of meat. Jukes located
the inner kitchen door and ducked down, grinning dourly.

“They’ll be feedin’ some minutes,” he muttered, working his way back.
“Well, we’ll give ’em time to hang themselves.”

He cruised around the yard and reassured himself there was no guard
with the horses, going so far as to put his hands upon the hitching
rack and take another knot in each of the tied reins. If any of them
wished to get away in a hurry they’d find unexpected difficulties.
He moved back to the squire’s position.

“Six of ’em,” said Jukes. “Mr. Milisher Colonel, you got any weapons?”

“My pistols. D’you mean you’ve got spirit enough to flush ’em?”

“Well, fightin’s my trade. You talk loud but I ain’t sure you’ll stand
fire. Milisher never do. Howsoever, if there’s any gimp in that fat skin
o’ yourn come along. I want you to go to the front door an’ wait until
you hear me shout. Then you shout--as loud as you can, breakin’ in. I’ll
be comin’ through the back way. Le’s go.”

The squire tied his horse to a fence and followed Jukes until they were
within a few paces of the tavern.

“Wait until you hear me,” admonished the latter, “then make all the
noise you can.”

He turned away. Another furtive glance through the window showed him
the dragoons had turned to industrious trenchermen and he skirted the
wall of the house until he saw a crack of light coming through a rear
door. He tried it gently and found it gave way. At that point he
stopped to affix his bayonet, then shoved the door open and let out a
cry loud enough to startle every echo in the countryside.

The door slammed against the inner wall and Jukes, musket advanced,
careened through a hot kitchen, had a momentary glimpse of a frightened
woman shrinking back, and arrived at the front room. He cried again--a
high, wailing, half savage yell--and burst upon them at the moment the
squire, obeying instructions to the letter, burst through the front way,
waving his pistols.

“Surrender, gentlemen, or you die!”

The table went over, sending the dishes to the floor with a crash and
clatter. Dragoons flung themselves against the wall, sabers flashing,
pistols out.

“Charge ’em!” yelled the sergeant. “Kill the devils!”

Jukes’ musket roared; smoke filled the room and the sergeant’s face
sagged. He fell to the floor, knocking aside the weapon of one of his
men.

“Come on, Pennsylvania!” shouted Jukes, his face afire.

He was as a man gone stark mad, teeth bared and eyes flashing. The
bayonet met a saber and knocked it aside. The room shook with gunshots
and he felt the powder burn his cheeks. Through the sudden sweat that
dripped over his eyes he saw his bayonet point turn to bright red. The
squire’s hoarse voice cried encouragement and summoned aid from the
night. His pistols spoke and then he was borne out of sight by a
dragoon retreating from the wild man with the face of fury who slashed
and struck and parried and lunged with a crimson bayonet.

The room was in semi-darkness, swimming with smoke; the fireplace glowed
dully, reflecting on the sergeant’s sightless eyes. The squire, from the
outer shadows, sent back a great cry:

“Keep at ’em, my boy! You’ve bagged the birds!”

“Swords down!” shouted a disheveled dragoon, sagging at the knee. “We’re
taken. Put up your gun, man!”

There were two of them standing against the wall, one with a streak of
blood across his face, the other staring sullenly.

“Gad,” said he, “we’ve been taken by a cursed savage! Quarter!”

Jukes swayed in his tracks, black hair fallen about his face, sweat
rolling across his whiskers. At some point in the mêlée the cloth of
one sleeve had been ripped by a saber and it hung away from his skinny
arm, making him all the more a nondescript figure. The flaming fervor
slowly faded from his eyes and he dropped the point of his bayonet,
suddenly tired.

They had done well enough. The sergeant and two others were dead on the
floor; two were prisoners and one had fled. The tavern keeper thrust his
white jowls out of the kitchen door and Jukes barked at him--

“What’s your politics, fat-face?”

“I’m a good patriot. Ye ----, y’ve wrecked my place!”

“Thank your luck I ain’t wrecked you,” growled Jukes. “Pick up that gun
and hold these fellers to the corner.”

He slouched toward the door, bent on retrieving the dragoon who had
fled. But there was no need of that. For there he lay, in the patch of
snow just beyond the doorsill. And beside him, one arm still gripping a
pistol, was the squire, St. Louis Cotton, of Cotton Hall and member of
the Pennsylvania Assembly. Jukes bent over, moved by a sudden, generous
pity. The squire’s plump face was turned upward and his lips twitched.

“My boy,” he whispered, “if you’re a straggler, go back before it’s too
late. No matter how you feel--go back. ’Tis not the time to desert the
country. The act will haunt you later, and your sons will hate you. Go
back.”

“Aye,” muttered Jukes, “it’s somethin’ I’d most made my mind to this
minute.”

But St. Louis Cotton never heard that, for he was dead, carrying on his
ruddy countenance that same pride of place. Jukes stared somberly. At
last he turned back to the room.

“Alva Jukes wa’n’t born to run off,” he muttered. “They’ll be changin’
guards at this minute--and who’s to help those poor devils to keep the
fire goin’?” He thought of the old gentleman with admiration. “A plucky
old cock. Maybe he’s right.”

The tavern keeper gave up his gun.

“I had better look after the squire.”

“Get help to bury ’em all,” replied Jukes gruffly. “Now, fat-face, bring
out somethin’ to eat an’ tally it to the account o’ Pennsylvania.”

A half-hour later he was bound back to Valley Forge with two prisoners
and six horses, the saddle of each one bearing the king’s crown. Jukes
smiled dourly as he plodded through the dark, swirling night. After
all, they could not do much to a straggler who returned in that royal
fashion.


[Transcriber’s Note: This story appeared in the July 1, 1927 issue of
Adventure magazine.]



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A MILITARY INTERLUDE ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG™ LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg™ License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg

Project Gutenberg is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 41 Watchung Plaza #516,
Montclair NJ 07042, USA, +1 (862) 621-9288. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


